Docs for ES|QL Views (#146559)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-views.md

---
navigation_title: "Define virtual indices using ES|QL views"
applies_to:
  serverless: preview
  stack: preview 9.4.0
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# {{esql}} Views [esql-views]

A view is a virtual index with fields that are produced from the output of an ES|QL query.
Each view has a name and a definition. The definition is a complete ES|QL query, with source commands and processing commands.
The view name can be used within an index pattern in the [`FROM`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/from.md) command of any normal ES|QL query, as well as within another view definition.
When the main query is executed, all referenced views are also executed independently.
This ensures up-to-date results from all source indexes referenced by both the main query and the view definitions themselves.
The final output combines all these results into a single list, including any duplicate rows.

## Defining views

Define a view using the REST API:
* [Create or update an ES|QL View](/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-put-view)
* [Delete an ES|QL View](/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-delete-view)

> * [Get or list ES|QL Views](/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-get-view)

Reviewer: These links don't work for me somehow.

Reviewer 2: The API docs are hosted on a different system so we will need to link to the full URL.

For example:
 https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-get-view

Author: Done

### Nesting and Branching

If a view definition contains a reference to another view, that is called a nested view.
ES|QL allows nesting to a depth of 10.
When multiple views are referenced within the same index-pattern, this leads
to a branched query plan where each view will be executed independently, in parallel
if possible, similar to subqueries and [`FORK`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fork.md).
There is a maximum allowed branching factor of 8, for the combination of views, subqueries and `FORK`.
So, for example, a single index pattern could reference four views and four subqueries,
but adding just one more view or subquery would exceed the allowed limit and the query will fail.

Branching and nested are allowed in combination as long as there is never more than one branch point.
This means that nested branching is not allowed:
* A view can contain subqueries, but then that view cannot be used together with other views, and all subqueries can only reference nested views that contain no further branching.
* A subquery can contain views, but then those views must themselves contain no branches (no subqueries or `FORK`)

> ### Limitations and known issues

Reviewer: There is a dedicated page for limitations at the very end of ES|QL docs, do we want to combine this section into the limitation page? There are quite a lot of information in this view page already, perhaps we can consider splitting it into multiple pages, so that it is a bit easier for users to navigate.

Reviewer 2: good idea, we could also use snippets and include the snippets in both places for visbility while maintaining single sources of truth :)

Author: I've also started thinking that the limitation page is getting quite long. Perhaps we want to split that up into sub-pages, some of which could be snippets included here and elsewhere?

Reviewer 2: maybe, although i'd keep the main limitations page on one page for as long as possible TBH, better for agent consumers of docs too

but ++++ to snippetizing

Views have certain limitations:
* Commands that also generate branched query plans are usually not allowed within views, unless the branch points can be merged:
  * `FORK`

>   * [subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md]

Reviewer: Seems like this link doesn't work.

Reviewer 2: The docs build is erroring on a few links missing `.md` extensions so the preview isn't generating properly:

```
## Broken Links (fix: append `.md` to each path)

- `/manage-data/data-store/index-basics`
- `/manage-data/data-store/data-streams`
- `/manage-data/data-store/aliases`
```

The same 3 links appear twice each in the error log, just in two different files

Author: Fixed

Author: I also needed to prefix with docs-content://

---
navigation_title: "Define virtual indices using ES|QL views"
applies_to:
  serverless: unavailable
  stack: preview 9.4.0
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

# {{esql}} Views [esql-views]

> A view is a virtual index with fields that are produced from the output of an ES|QL query.

Reviewer 2: The intro jumps into execution mechanics before establishing why a user would want views. Consider adding a use cases section `## When to use views` mentioning reusable named queries, combining pre-processed data sources, abstracting common transformations etc.

Author: I noticed that subqueries and FORK do not do this, and rely only on the examples to clarify use cases. I guess this is in-line with the reference material nature of these docs? I can try think of a way to improve this, but I do wonder if this should be elsewhere in the user-guide?

Author: I added a section, with claudes help. Curious to see how you feel about it.

Reviewer 2: I like it, like I mentioned in another comment some of these suggestions are coming from best practices we pulled together in contribution guides: https://www.elastic.co/docs/contribute-docs/content-types

so when I get time, I'll try to apply these to existing pages :)

## Defining views

Define a view using the REST API:
* [Create or update an ES|QL View](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-put-view)
* [Delete an ES|QL View](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-delete-view)
* [Get or list ES|QL Views](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-esql-get-view)

For example, consider the following ES|QL query:

:::{include} _snippets/commands/examples/views.csv-spec/views_plain_addresses.md
:::

We can define a view called `country_addresses` using that query:

```console
PUT /_query/view/country_addresses
{
    "query": """
        FROM addresses
        | RENAME city.country.name AS country
        | EVAL country = CASE(country == "United States of America", "United States", country)
        | STATS count=COUNT() BY country
        """
}
```

Now a query like `FROM country_addresses` will produce the same output:

:::{include} _snippets/commands/examples/views.csv-spec/views_country_addresses.md
:::

## Using views

Use views as if they were ordinary indices:

```esql
FROM index_pattern
```

> Where `index_pattern` is a comma-separate list of index or view names, including

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where `index_pattern` is a comma-separated list of index or view names, including
```

wildcards and date-math.

> Much like with [subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Much like [subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md),
```

views enable you to combine results from multiple independently processed
data sources within a single query. Each view runs its own pipeline of
processing commands (such as `WHERE`, `EVAL`, `STATS`, or `SORT`) and the
results are combined together with results from other index patterns, views or subqueries
in the `FROM` clause.

Fields that exist in one source but not another are filled with `null` values.

### Nesting and Branching

If a view definition contains a reference to another view, that is called a nested view.
ES|QL allows nesting to a depth of 10.
When multiple views are referenced within the same index-pattern, this leads
to a branched query plan where each view will be executed independently, in parallel
if possible, similar to subqueries and [`FORK`](/reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fork.md).
There is a maximum allowed branching factor of 8, for the combination of views, subqueries and `FORK`.
So, for example, a single index pattern could reference four views and four subqueries,
but adding just one more view or subquery would exceed the allowed limit and the query will fail.

> Branching and nested are allowed in combination as long as there is never more than one branch point.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Branching and nesting are allowed in combination as long as there is never more than one branch point.
```

> This means that nested branching is not allowed under some circumstance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that nested branching has restrictions:
```

might be slightly better lead-in text?

> * A view can contain subqueries, but then that view cannot be used together with other views, and all subqueries can only reference nested views that contain no further branching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A view can contain subqueries, but that view cannot be used together with other views, and the subqueries can only reference nested views that contain no further branching.
```

> * A subquery can contain views, but then those views must themselves contain no branches (no subqueries or `FORK`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A subquery can contain views, but those views must not introduce any additional branch points via subqueries or `FORK`
```

maybe a little clearer?

### Limitations and known issues

Views have certain limitations:
* Commands that also generate branched query plans are usually not allowed within views, unless the branch points can be merged:
  * `FORK`
  * [subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md)
* Cross-cluster search:

>   * Remote views in CCS are not allowed (ie. `FROM cluster:view` will only match remote indexes with the name `view`. If a remote view is found, the query will fail).

Reviewer 2: link to ESQL CCS page?

Author: done

  * If a remote index matches a local view name, the query will fail.

> * Serverless and Cross-project search

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Serverless and Cross-project search:
```

could link to ESQL CPS page too?

  * Views are currently disabled in serverless

>   * The plan to enable views in serverless will include limitations:

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this level of future-looking roadmap detail is appropriate? 🤔 Might be good question for product.

Author: Originally we'd hoped the serverless version would come out at a similar time to 9.4.0, but now it looks like there are complications there, and it will take longer. So there is likely a time-gap between 9.4.0 and serverless support for views. What I started doing yesterday was adding: `applies_to: serverless: unavailable` in a few places, but did not delete this content. I think perhaps `unavailable` is the wrong option here, can we use `coming`?

Reviewer 2: `unavailable` is the correct option, the policy is to only publish serverless stuff once it's live so there's no coming or planned option for serverless

Reviewer 2: > What I started doing yesterday was adding: applies_to: serverless: unavailable in a few places

the **page-level** `unavailable` for serverless should be enough because that applies to the entire page but you could just repeat the signal in this list with "Views are initially unavailable in serverless"

    * Remote views in CPS will not be allowed (ie. `FROM view` will only match origin project views, and if linked project views with that name are found, the query will fail).
    * If a linked project contains a view with the same name as a local view or index, the query will fail.

> * Query parameters are not allowed in the view definition, and therefor query parameters in the main query will never impact the view results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Query parameters are not allowed in the view definition, and therefore query parameters in the main query will never impact the view results.
```

* Query DSL filtering on the main query will currently affect the source indices in the view definition, and this will change in later releases.
  * The future design will have the query filtering impact the output of the view, not the source indices
* METADATA directives inside and outside a view definition behave the same as they do for
  [`METADATA` in subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md#subqueries-with-metadata). This will change for views.

## Examples

The following examples show how to use views within the `FROM` command.

### Combine data from multiple indices

Assume we've defined three views in a similar way to the example above, each counting the number of documents that reference a particular country, but from three different source indices:
* `country_airports` - reports counts of documents per country from our `airports` index
* `country_addresses` - reports counts of documents per country from our `addresses` index
* `country_languages` - reports counts of documents per country from our `languages` index

Now we can query these together with a query like:

:::{include} _snippets/commands/examples/views.csv-spec/views_country_filtered.md
:::

> Note how documents from multiple views are not combined. Since we know these views all have a `count` column, we could `SUM` those.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could clarify what "not combined" means, e.g. "Note that rows from each view appear independently: they are not merged or joined by key."

Author: I went for a third option, ignoring the `combined` issue entirely, because that is actually a separate concern relating to the behaviour of aliases when compared with views. And it is a bit of a can of worms, so I might avoid that entirely for now.

        | DROP code
       """
}
```

This creates a view called `airports_mp_filtered` that contains all rows from the `airports` index that also have a matching `abbrev` inside the `airports_mp` index.
This is effectively a subset of the `airports` index.

We could, for example, see how many airports are defined only in `airports` versus how many are defined in the view, by combining both a view and an index in the same `FROM` command:

:::{include} _snippets/commands/examples/views.csv-spec/airports_mp_filtered_combined.md
:::

### Views with METADATA

The [`METADATA` directive](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-metadata-fields.md) is supported both inside and outside a view, and
follows the same rules as observed for [`METADATA` in Subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md#subqueries-with-metadata).
Inside the view it generates columns, just like other fields, and these can be used for filtering and as output columns.

Outside the view it generates `null` values.
Note that this is a known limitation of the current tech-preview, and is anticipated to be addressed in a future update,
at which point `METADATA _index` will contain the name of the view.

> ## Comparing views to subqueries

Reviewer 2: This content should be equally visiible in the views and subqueries pages

Also, consider adding a short disambiguation to the "Query multiple sources" landing page (esql-multi.md) that helps readers pick between subqueries, views etc. (and maybe FORK too?). That section should then be cross-linked from the individual pages for findability.

Author: A good opportunity for a snippet, perhaps?

Reviewer 2: 🎯

Author: I've generalized to include FORK and made this a snippet, included in both the subqueries and views pages.

Complex processing commands can be used inside both views and subqueries, as detailed in the [description of subqueries](/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-subquery.md#description).
In theory, neither is capable of supporting nested branching (ie. subqueries within subqueries), however views do support this to some extent, as detailed below.

### Differences

Views have names, and these names are unique within the index namespace. This means a view cannot have the same name as an index, and vice versa.
Views can be nested within one another, as long as neither of the following two rules are broken:
* Cyclic references are not allowed. For example, if `viewA` references `viewB` and `viewB` references `viewC` it is not allowed to have `viewC` reference `viewA`.
  * Detection of cyclic references is done at main query execution time
* Multiple branching points do not exist

This last point highlights a difference between views and subqueries.
While subqueries simply disallow the use of further subqueries or `FORK` within a subquery, views will allow this under limited conditions.

> ## Query compaction

Reviewer 2: This section (caveat: to my non-SME eyes) gets pretty in the weeds about implementation details of query planning. I wonder if most users just need to know the constraint (max branching 8, no nested branching) and that views handle this more flexibly than subqueries.

Author: Indeed. I'm thinking this entire section could be moved into a blog, and dramatically simplified here. That was actually my original thinking, but while writing the docs I thought I needed to say something about this, so I gave it a shot and clearly the shot is pretty messy!

Author: I asked claude to make mermaid diagrams and simplify this section a lot. Looks much better. Still not just a set of rules or conditions, and we could yet decided to simplify even further, but I thought I should get your review of the new, nicer version first.

Reviewer 2: Looks much better! I agree that could be simpler, but we can always revisit in future

Consider the case where we defined a view that contains subqueries:

```console
PUT /_query/view/view_x
{
    "query": """
        FROM (
            FROM app-events-* | KEEP msg, level
        ), (
            FROM auth-events-* | KEEP msg, level
        )
       """
}
```

And another view that contains further sub-queries

```console
PUT /_query/view/view_y
{
    "query": """
        FROM (
            FROM nginx-events-* | KEEP msg, level
        ), (
            FROM apache-events-* | KEEP msg, level
        )
       """
}
```

If we attempt to use these together:

```esql
FROM other-events, view_x, view_y
| STATS count(msg) BY level
```

This will be resolved initially to a query plan that has two levels of branching:
* Top of plan does the stats
  * Next level has three branches
    * Read data from `other-events`
    * Read data from `view_x`, which means running the query inside `view_x` which itself contains two branches
      * Read data from `app-events-*` and keep two columns
      * Read data from `auth-events-*` and keep two columns

>     * Read data from `view_y`, which means running the query inside `view_x` which itself contains two branches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Read data from `view_y`, which means running the query inside `view_y` which itself contains two branches
```

        ), (
            FROM apache-events-* | KEEP msg, level
        )
    )
| STATS count(msg) BY level
```

But views have an optimization that allows for compaction of nested branches to the same level.
This means the query will be transformed to instead be a single set of five branches:

* Top of plan does the stats
    * Next level has five branches
        * Read data from `other-events`
        * Read data from `app-events-*` and keep two columns
        * Read data from `auth-events-*` and keep two columns
        * Read data from `nginx-events-*` and keep two columns
        * Read data from `apache-events-*` and keep two columns

This would be as if the user had used the subquery like this:

```esql
FROM
    other-events,
    FROM (
        FROM app-events-* | KEEP msg, level
    ), (
        FROM auth-events-* | KEEP msg, level
    )
    FROM (
        FROM nginx-events-* | KEEP msg, level
    ), (
        FROM apache-events-* | KEEP msg, level
    )
| STATS count(msg) BY level
```

This query will not fail.

However, it is important to notice that this compaction will not happen if the view definition contains any commands after the subqueries.

> In that case the branches cannot be combined and the query will fail.

Reviewer 2: The page ends abruptly with no related links. Consider adding a "Related pages" section linking to subqueries, FORK, FROM, and the views REST API pages and any other relevant pages

Author: Good idea. However, I'm not sure I've seen that pattern elsewhere. Is there precedence, or is this just a new thing we should consider doing more of?

Author: Also, I generally add links in-line for the first time I mention a new term, but try to avoid doing it for every mention. I doubt I got that right, and am also unsure of the exact correct policy for term links. My natural tendency is to link everything all the time, but I know that is considered bad form in documentation, so I try to avoid it. If the best approach to link first mention, and have a references or related pages section at the bottom?

Reviewer 2: it's definitely more of an art than a science, but I think linking the first time you mention something that's link-worthy is good and then having a list of top related pages at the end 

so on the related pages thing, yes we haven't codified this as a rule in the past, but it is a best practice that we're trying to introduce per the recently added content type guidelines in 

https://www.elastic.co/docs/contribute-docs/content-types

> Is there precedence, or is this just a new thing we should consider doing more of?

so we need to do a sweep of the ESQL docs to add this pattern which we haven't been following, but we are trying to do it all over the docs nowadays :)

Author: OK. Adding "related pages" to both views and subqueries pages.
